Update silent payments topic (#1630)
bitcoinops/bitcoinops.github.io: _topics/en/silent-payments.md

## Required.  Use Markdown formatting.  Only one paragraph.  No links allowed.
## Should be less than 500 characters
excerpt: >
  **Silent payments** unlocks the ability to receive private payments from
  anyone on a single static address without requiring any interaction or

>   extra on-chain overhead. This helps improve privacy.

Author: Updated to be a bit more accurate, the original excerpt mentions the provided address is off chain.

This is not always the case, see the signet address provided in BIP352 [here](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/28536#issuecomment-1735484152).

Author: Thank you for the detailed and thoughtful response! I agree, will revert the change here

---

Traditionally, a new address is generated whenever a user receives
two or more payments. This is because when you receive several payments
to the same Bitcoin address, others can reasonably assume that the same
person received all of those payments even if the payments are later
spent in separate transactions. This is also known as address reuse,
and more can be found under [Output linking][topic output linking].

With silent payments, a user can generate a silent payment address
and make it publicly known. The sender then takes a public key from
one of their chosen inputs for the payment, and uses it to derive a
shared secret which is then used to tweak the silent payment address,
before sending the payment to the tweaked address.

The intended recipient detects the payment by scanning every transaction
in the blockchain. This is the main downside, along with the lack of

> light client support, and the requirement to control your own input(s)

Reviewer: If we define a "light client" as a client performing SPV, which is the traditional definition, then light clients can support SPs just fine.  For example, see https://twitter.com/josibake/status/1782818325367525449

You could just drop this clause or you could mention that they're not compatible with `[compact block filters][topic compact block filters]` and require upgrades to `[block explorers][topic block explorers]`.

Author: TIL! thank you for linking that, i will add a mention for the latter 2

Reviewer 2: Slightly pedantic, but silent payments does work with compact block filters with the caveat that the client needs the 33 bytes per transaction before being able to use compact block filters.

For example, I've been working on a light client for silent payments that does use a modified electrum server to vend only the tweak data, and then the wallet uses `BIP158` for everything else: 

* to check if the generated `scriptPubKey` exists in a block
* to download the block if there is a match to get the outpoint data needed to spend the transaction
* to broadcast the transaction to peers when spending

This improves on electrum style wallets in that the electrum server learns nothing about the wallets transactions, but comes at the cost of needing more bandwidth than a traditionally electrum-backed wallet.

> as the sender. An example use case would be private one-time donations.

Reviewer: Maybe remove the word "one-time", as multiple-time donations are an even more interesting case: each one pays a different output script, meaning Alice can donate to Bob multiple times without necessarily creating a link between her outputs.

---

Traditionally, a new address should be generated whenever a user receives
two or more payments. This is because when you receive several payments
to the same Bitcoin address, others can reasonably assume that the same
person received all of those payments even if the payments are later
spent in separate transactions. This is also known as address reuse,

> and more can be found under [Output linking][topic output linking].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and more can be found under [output linking][topic output linking].
```

> and more can be found under [output linking][topic output linking].

Author: This is a good point! Thank you for providing the example too, eliminating the need for interaction is definitely a benefit of silent payments. I will add it.

> With silent payments, a user can generate a silent payment address

Reviewer 3: Maybe?

```suggestion
With silent payments, a receiver can generate a silent payment address
```

and make it publicly known. The sender then takes a public key from

> one of their chosen inputs for the payment, and uses it to derive a

Reviewer 4: This part is slightly inaccurate.

Sender can select one <ins>or more</ins> inputs and uses their <ins>secret</ins> keys to derive the shared secret (together with public key of the silent payment address). It is receiver who uses public keys from inputs (and corresponding secret key of the silent payment address).

Author: Yes, thank you for the correction! I copied this part from Ruben's original gist [here](https://gist.github.com/RubenSomsen/c43b79517e7cb701ebf77eec6dbb46b8) which is a little outdated as @josibake mentioned. Will update this paragraph to be more accurate 👍

> shared secret which is then used to tweak the silent payment address,

Reviewer 3: Could help with clarity

```suggestion
shared secret which is then used to tweak the static silent payment address,
```

before sending the payment to the tweaked address.

The intended recipient detects the payment by scanning every transaction
in the blockchain. This is the main downside, along with the requirement to
control your own input(s) as the sender. An example use case would be

> one-time donations.

Reviewer 2: > The intended recipient detects the payment by scanning every transaction
in the blockchain

This isn't quite accurate. The difference is with BIP32 style wallets, the `scriptPubKeys` can be generated ahead of time and then "watched" for to see if they appear in the UTXO set. If you get a match, the wallet then needs to get transaction data from somewhere to add it to the wallet. With silent payments, if you see a taproot output in the UTXO set, you don't know if it is yours or not until you do the ECDH step. ECDH is computationally more expensive than pre-generating `scriptPubKeys` and to do this ECDH you need data from the transaction inputs. 

Concretely, this means a wallet will need to get 33 bytes of data per transaction that it believes is a silent payment transaction (i.e. at least one eligible input and at least one taproot output) and needs to do an ECDH with this 33 bytes.

Sadly, I don't have a suggestion on how to word this succinctly, but maybe something more along the lines of 

>the intended recipient detects the payment by doing ECDH with the summed input public keys of the transaction and the scan key from their address. This is the main downside in that this is computationally more expensive than simply scanning the UTXO set for a `scriptPubKey` and requires access to the summed input public keys."

Regarding the sender:

> along with the requirement to control your own input(s) as the sender

This isn't a requirement for silent payments. Rather, it was designed with collaborative use cases in mind e.g. coinjoins. I think it would be more accurate to say that using silent payments in a collaborative setting is left for future work and that it is still an open question whether or not using silent payments in a collaborative setting is provably secure.

Author: Thanks for calling out the difference between silent payments and BIP32 style wallets, the side-by-side comparison is really helpful! It looks like recipients still need to scan eligible transactions -- but instead of looking for an exact UTXO match, they're only looking at the taproot outputs, and do an ECDH computation on each one to check whether the output belongs to them.

I'll update this to include the ECDH computation part you mentioned, as well as the comparison with BIP32.

---

Traditionally, a user who receives payments should generate a new Bitcoin
address for every payment. This is because receiving multiple payments
to the same address reveals that the same user received those payments,
even if the outputs are later spent in separate transactions.
This is known as [address reuse][topic output linking].

Using a new address often requires a secure interaction between sender
and receiver so that the receiver can provide a fresh address every time.
However, interaction is often infeasible and in many cases undesirable.

With silent payments, a receiver can generate and publish a single silent
payment address, eliminating the need for interaction.
The sender then selects one or more of their chosen inputs and uses their
secret key(s) together with public key of the silent payment address to
derive a shared secret which is used to generate the destination.

The intended recipient detects the payment by scanning transactions
in the blockchain and performing an ECDH calculation with the summed
input public keys of the transaction and the scan key from their address.
The main downside is that it is more computationally expensive than

> simply scanning the UTXO set for a `scriptPubKey` as in [BIP32][] style wallets.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
simply scanning the UTXO set for a `scriptPubKey` as in [BIP32][]-style wallets.
```

> Additionally, using silent payments in a collaborative setting is left for

Author: yes! upon closer inspection, I can see how this is confusing

thank you for explaining why this could be confusing for the readers, and offering concrete suggestions on how to improve clarity here 👍 love learning good stuff about better technical writing through this pr here!

pushed a commit to incorporate your feedback

---

Traditionally, a new address should be generated whenever a user receives
two or more payments. This is because when you receive several payments

> to the same Bitcoin address, others can reasonably assume that the same
> person received all of those payments even if the payments are later
> spent in separate transactions. This is also known as address reuse,

Reviewer 5: The big problem with address reuse is that it not only hints at someone being in control of multiple UTXOs such as with the [Common-input-ownership heuristic](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Common-input-ownership_heuristic), but since it’s actually the same output script, it’s undeniable that the funds went to the same receiver.

```suggestion
to the same Bitcoin address, it is a given that the same
person or entity received all of those payments even if the outputs are later
spent in separate transactions. This is also known as address reuse,
```

> spent in separate transactions. This is also known as address reuse,
> and more can be found under [output linking][topic output linking].

Reviewer 6: Can be shortened:
```suggestion
spent in separate transactions. This is known as [address reuse][topic output linking].
```

Using a new address often requires a secure interaction between sender

> and receiver so that the receiver can provide a fresh address everytime.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
and receiver so that the receiver can provide a fresh address every time.
```

However, interaction is often infeasible and in many cases undesirable.

With silent payments, a receiver can generate a silent payment address
and make it publicly known, thus eliminating the need for interaction.
The sender can select one or more of their chosen inputs and use their
secret key(s) to derive the shared secret (together with public key of

> the silent payment address), which is used to generate the destination.

Author: done 👍

> The intended recipient detects the payment by scanning eligible transactions

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The intended recipient detects the payment by scanning transactions
```
While I understand why only some transactions are eligible, we're not getting into enough detail here to even hint at what that means, so I think the word "eligible" will leave readers wondering. Also, to be precise, a transaction must be "scanned" to determine if it's eligible in the first place. I know that scanning an ineligible transaction is much less work (it can be eliminated quickly) but perhaps that's a nuance not worth trying to convey here.

Author: Thank you for explaining the rationale behind this, updated!

> in the blockchain, before performing ECDH calculation with the summed

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
in the blockchain, before performing an ECDH calculation with the summed
```

The main downside is that it is more computationally expensive than
simply scanning the UTXO set for a `scriptPubKey` as in [BIP32][]-style wallets.
Additionally, using silent payments in a collaborative setting such as

> [coinjoining][topic coinjoins] is left for future work, and it remains an open

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[coinjoining][topic coinjoin] is left for future work, and it remains an open
```
